# DevOps pipelines in GitLab CI/CD 🚀

Welcome to the DevOps pipelines guide for deploying your project using GitLab pipelines!
This README provides step-by-step instructions to set up your GitLab repository and initiate manual deployment pipelines.
Follow each step carefully to correctly configure your environment and secrets.

## Runner setup 🛠️

If you use your own runners, you will need to configure your runners to do "Docker-in-Docker". You can read about it in the [GitLab Documentation](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/ci/docker/using_docker_build.html).

A GitLab runner configuration like this works out of the box. Perhaps this is not the most secure setup, but it works.

[Register a runner](https://docs.gitlab.com/runner/register/) in one of your servers, and then modify its configuration (check `/etc/gitlab-runner/config.toml`):

```toml
concurrent = 1
check_interval = 0
connection_max_age = "15m0s"
shutdown_timeout = 0

[session_server]
  session_timeout = 1800

[[runners]]
  name = "runner1"
  url = "https://gitlab.com"
  id = <REDACTED>
  token = "<REDACTED>"
  token_obtained_at = 2024-09-17T08:51:36Z
  token_expires_at = 0001-01-01T00:00:00Z
  executor = "docker"
  [runners.custom_build_dir]
  [runners.cache]
    MaxUploadedArchiveSize = 0
    [runners.cache.s3]
    [runners.cache.gcs]
    [runners.cache.azure]
  [runners.docker]
    tls_verify = false
    image = "docker:24.0.5"
    privileged = true
    disable_entrypoint_overwrite = false
    oom_kill_disable = false
    disable_cache = false
    volumes = ["/var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock", "/certs/client", "/cache"]
    shm_size = 0
    network_mtu = 0

```

## Repository setup 🛠️

See [Get started with GitLab CI/CD](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/ci/).

### Step 1: Add the deployment environment variables

1.  Visit [GitLab](https://gitlab.com/), or your organization's GitLab instance, and log in with your credentials.
2.  Go to your repository at [{{ cookiecutter.github_organization }}/{{ cookiecutter.project_slug }}](https://gitlab.com/{{ cookiecutter.github_organization }}/{{ cookiecutter.project_slug }}).
    Note that you might need to adjust the URL's host name to your organization's.
3.  Click on `Settings` at the left menu and select `CI/CD`.
4.  Expand the `Variables`.
5.  Add all variables and their corresponding values, copying them from the `.env` file.
    This file is not commited into the repository, and that's why we need to add them here.
    **Note**: do not mark any of the variables as *protected*.

### Step 2: Add deployment's host SSH key as a known host

1.  Run `ssh-keyscan -t ed25519 DEPLOY_HOST` in a terminal, where you substitute `DEPLOY_HOST` with the address of the host, as in the `.env` file.
2.  Copy the prompted value, and add it as a `Variable` in the GitLab web interface, like in the previous step.
    Name the variable `SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS`.

See [Use SSH keys to communicate with GitLab](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/user/ssh.html).

### Step 3: Add an SSH deployment key

1.  Create a new SSH key that will be used by GitLab CI/CD to connect to your host.
    You can create it in your terminal with the command `ssh-keygen -t ed25519`.
2.  Copy the public key to the `DEPLOY_HOST`'s user's `~/.ssh/authorized_keys` file.
    Check your `DEPLOY_HOST` and `DEPLOY_USER` in the `.env` file.
3.  Copy the private key as a `Variable` like in the previous step.
    Name the variable `DEPLOY_SSH_PRIVATE_KEY`.

*Note:* instead of creating a new key, you can use the one that this template creates for you when you run `make server-setup`.
Check the section "Server Setup" in the file `README.md` in the same folder as this file for details.
Be aware that the key generated by this template will not be added to your git repository because it is explicitly excluded by the `.gitignore` file.

## Development & deployment 🚀

The development should be done in a separate branch such as `develop`.

When opening a merge requests from that branch to `main`, the checks and tests will be executed and docker images
will be built.

When merging the merge request, the project will be deployed.


## Deployment with an auxiliary docker image

The provided configuration tries to mimic the `Makefile` deployment flow.
It uses the same commands as you would use when deploying from your computer.

If you want, you can use an [auxiliary docker image](https://github.com/kitconcept/docker-stack-deploy/), which does the deployment for you instead of using the `Makefile`.
This Docker image is used if you configure the deployments in GitHub.

Check the commented section of the `.gitlab-ci.yml` file for an example.
